Agent Passport Standards Series                               T. Cvikl
APS 1001 (2026), revision 2                                   A. Tran
Series 1000: Payment Rails                                     B. Liu
Category: Proposed Standard                               J. Burnazyan
                                                     Legis Labs Ltd
                                                     7 September 2026


                             APS 1001

   Agent Passport Standard: Delegated Authority of Autonomous Agents
                          on Payment Rails


Status of this Memo

   APS 1001 specifies the procedure by which an autonomous software
   agent proves, before a payment executes, that it acts within a
   current, human-granted authority.  It is a proposal for
   discussion, demonstrated on synthetic data.  It does not describe
   a current legal requirement.  Distribution is unlimited.

   Revision 2 replaces the per-agent approval of revision 1 with a
   model register: the authority approves a model once, and every
   agent deployed on it inherits that approval under the authority's
   policy ceilings.

Abstract

   An agent that can be identified can still act beyond what its
   principal allowed.  This document separates identity from
   authority.  An Agent Passport is an envelope of three signed
   claims, each made by the only party entitled to make it: the
   supervisory authority, which approved the model; the customer,
   which deployed an agent on that model; and the same customer,
   which signed the mandate the agent must stay within.  A relying
   bank verifies the envelope and the signed instruction with an
   ordered, deny-by-default procedure and answers ALLOW, ESCALATE or
   DENY with a rule citation and a signed receipt.  Authority may be
   delegated but never expanded.  Revocation is a registry lookup.
   Every decision is replayable.

1.  Introduction

   Firms delegate invoice payment to AI agents.  A bank receiving an
   instruction cannot determine which agent sent it, whether it was
   permitted to, or who answers for it.  Since 2024, UK banks bear
   the loss when a misdirected payment is authorised.  This standard
   gives the bank one verification call that answers those three
   questions before money moves, and gives the authority one
   approval per model rather than one per agent.

   The key words MUST, MUST NOT, SHOULD and MAY are to be interpreted
   as described in RFC 2119.

2.  Terminology

   Authority     The supervisor that approves models, sets policy
                 ceilings and maintains the status registry.
   Provider      The AI company that registers a model.  It attests
                 the accuracy of the model's documentation and
                 nothing else.
   Model         A named, version-pinned AI system registered by a
                 provider and approved by the authority.
   Customer      The legal person whose funds an agent moves.
   Agent         The customer's deployment of an approved model:
                 a private key, a configuration, a mandate.
   Relying party The bank that executes payment instructions.
   Passport      The envelope defined in Section 4.  A passport that
                 satisfies Sections 3 to 7 is APS 1001-conformant.

3.  Registration and Approval

   3.1  A provider MUST register a model before any agent is deployed
        on it.  A registration MUST name the legal entity, a natural
        person attesting the documentation, the model and its pinned
        version, and locations of its benchmark data, training
        details and model card.  A registration MUST NOT name a
        customer or contain any mandate content.

   3.2  The authority MUST evaluate a registration against written
        checks and record each result with its source:

           M.1  registered company matches the companies register
           M.2  a named person attests the documentation
           M.3  model documented: name, identifier, provider,
                pinned version, documentation locations
           M.4  version pinned
           M.5  registered use within the authority's policy
           M.6  model not already on the register

        Automated review MAY draft; a human officer MUST decide.

   3.3  An approval MUST state the policy ceilings that every mandate
        on the model must satisfy (maximum per-payment limit, maximum
        rolling limit per payee account, maximum validity, permitted
        actions) and a supervisor condition (an amount above which
        the relying party holds the instruction for a named human).

   3.4  An approval MAY be suspended or revoked.  Either act MUST
        cascade to every passport issued on the model.

4.  The Passport

   A passport MUST consist of three signed tokens (JWT, RFC 7519;
   EdDSA, RFC 8037) and an identifier:

      assurance       signed by the AUTHORITY: the approved model
                      (registration reference, name, identifier,
                      version), approval status, policy ceilings,
                      supervisor condition, validity, registry
                      pointer, and the hash of the agent_identity it
                      was issued for.
      agent_identity  signed by the CUSTOMER: agent name, the model
                      it runs on, agent public key (cnf, RFC 7800),
                      proof of possession, configuration hash, key
                      custody.
      mandate         signed by the CUSTOMER: permitted actions,
                      payee allow-list by account, per-payment limit,
                      rolling limit per payee account, expiry, as an
                      authorization_details object (RFC 9396).

   No party MAY alter a claim it did not sign.  A passport carries
   permission, not personal data.

5.  Issuance

   5.1  A customer registers an agent by choosing an approved model,
        generating a key pair, proving possession of the private key
        by signing the authority's challenge, and signing
        agent_identity.  This creates an agent record.  It is not a
        passport.

   5.2  The customer writes its mandate.  Before signing, the system
        MUST check that every limit sits within the policy ceilings
        of the model's approval (containment).  A mandate outside the
        ceilings MUST NOT be signed.

   5.3  On signature of a contained mandate the authority's system
        MUST sign the assurance from the model approval, assign the
        passport identifier, set the registry status to ACTIVE and,
        where a purpose-bound rail is in use, mirror the mandate on
        it.  No further human review takes place: the human decision
        was the model approval.

6.  Verification Procedure

   The agent MUST sign every instruction with the key named in
   agent_identity.  The relying party MUST evaluate the following in
   order and stop at the first failure:

      R.1  assurance signature verifies (authority key)
      R.2  assurance ACTIVE and unexpired (registry lookup)
      R.3  agent_identity verifies (customer key) and is bound to
           this assurance
      R.4  instruction signed by the agent key in agent_identity
      R.5  mandate present, customer-signed, unexpired
      R.6  action permitted; payee account on the allow-list
      R.7  amount within the per-payment limit
      R.8  amount plus the relying party's own rolling total within
           the limit per payee account
      R.9  amount above the supervisor condition  -> ESCALATE
      else                                        -> ALLOW

   The result MUST cite the rule that decided it and MUST be
   accompanied by a receipt signed by the authority.  Limits live in
   the mandate; running totals live at the relying party.

7.  Delegation

   Where an agent delegates to another, the delegation MUST be signed
   by the delegating key, and for scopes S0 (mandate), S1 ... Sn:

      Sn  is a subset of  ...  S1  is a subset of  S0,  and
      the action is an element of Sn.

   Delegation MAY narrow authority.  It MUST NOT expand it.

8.  Lifecycle

   Register  A provider registers a model (Section 3.1).
   Approve   Checks M.1 to M.6 are run; adversarial cases are run
             through the procedure of Section 6; a human officer
             decides; the approval states ceilings and a condition.
   Issue     A customer registers an agent and signs a contained
             mandate; the passport is issued at signing (Section 5).
   Act       The relying party verifies each instruction.
   Detect    Every refusal is recorded.  A repeated refusal of the
             same rule SHOULD raise an alert to the authority.
   Revoke    The authority sets the registry status of a passport or
             of a model.  The next instruction fails at R.2 on every
             rail that mirrors the mandate.
   Replay    Every decision MUST be reproducible from its recorded
             inputs.

9.  Security Considerations

   A copied passport is useless without the agent's private key
   (R.4).  A forged or altered claim fails its signature (R.1, R.3,
   R.5).  A manipulated agent that requests payment to an account
   the customer never listed fails R.6 regardless of how genuine the
   invoice appeared.  A mandate cannot exceed the model's ceilings
   (Section 5.2), so a customer cannot grant what the authority did
   not allow.  Compromise of the authority's key, and attestation of
   the running software, are out of scope.

10. What APS 1001 Does Not Specify

   Settlement.  Know-your-customer, sanctions or funds checks.
   Whether a payment is wise.  Liability of the provider for an
   agent's conduct: the provider attests documentation; the customer
   owns the mandate.  Any judgement by a model: models read and
   draft; rules decide; humans sign.

11. References

   APS 1002 (delegation chains, reserved), APS 2001 (tax rails,
   reserved), RFC 2119, RFC 7519 (JWT), RFC 7800 (cnf), RFC 8037
   (EdDSA), RFC 9396 (Rich Authorization Requests), W3C Verifiable
   Credentials (JWT profile), NIST NCCoE 2026 (agent identity and
   authorization), FATF 2025 (AI and AML/CFT), HM Treasury (2026)
   Modernising Payment Services Regulation, Recommendation 10.

Authors' Addresses

   Legis Labs Ltd, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
   Reference implementation: https://pay.cdir.legislabs.uk
   Source: https://github.com/LegisLabs/agent-passport
