Agent Passport Standards Series                               T. Cvikl
APS 1001 (2026), revision 4                                   A. Tran
Series 1000: Payment Rails                                     B. Liu
Category: Proposed Industry Standard                      J. Burnazyan
                                                     Legis Labs Ltd
                                                     8 September 2026


                             APS 1001

   Agent Passport Standard: Delegated Authority of AI Agents
                          on Payment Rails


Status of this Memo

   APS 1001 specifies the procedure by which an AI agent proves,
   before a payment executes, that it acts within a current,
   human-granted authority, and by which the bank that executes the
   payment records evidence of what it verified.  It is a proposal
   for an industry standard, demonstrated on synthetic data.  It
   does not describe a current legal requirement, and no regulator
   has approved it.  Distribution is unlimited.

   Revision 3 replaced the authority approval of revision 2 with a
   bank-operated model: an industry register records AI products,
   each bank decides which registered products its customers may
   delegate to, and the regulator receives evidence through normal
   supervisory processes without operating or approving anything.
   Revision 4 adds assurance levels on filings, currency and
   velocity limits and account-type tiers on mandates, replay
   protection by nonce, two classes of refusal, and a check of
   payees against the public company register.

Abstract

   An AI agent that can be identified can still act beyond what its
   principal allowed.  This document separates identity from
   authority.  An Agent Passport is an envelope of three signed
   claims, each made by the only party entitled to make it: the
   bank, which admitted the AI product to its list; the customer,
   which deployed an agent on that product; and the same customer,
   which signed the mandate the agent must stay within.  Behind
   them stands a register on which the product's provider filed
   its identity, an accountable principal, insurance and
   Independent Assurance Evidence.  The bank verifies the envelope
   and the signed instruction with an ordered, deny-by-default
   procedure and answers ALLOW, ESCALATE or DENY with a rule
   citation and a signed receipt.  Authority may be delegated but
   never expanded.  Revocation is a list lookup.  Every decision is
   replayable, and every passport can be exported as one
   self-verifying evidence bundle.

1.  Introduction

   Firms delegate invoice payment to AI agents.  A bank receiving an
   instruction cannot determine which agent sent it, whether it was
   permitted to, or who answers for it.  Since 2024, UK banks bear
   the loss when a misdirected payment is authorised.  HM Treasury's
   2026 consultation on modernising payment services regulation
   asks how authentication, consent and liability provisions should
   adapt to agentic payments.  This standard gives the bank one
   verification call that answers those three questions before
   money moves, and gives a supervisor complete evidence afterwards
   without requiring it to inspect agents, products or transactions
   in advance.

   The key words MUST, MUST NOT, SHOULD and MAY are to be interpreted
   as described in RFC 2119.

2.  Terminology

   Register      An industry-operated record of AI products.  It
                 records identity and accountability.  It does not
                 certify that AI agents are good; it guarantees that
                 someone is accountable when they are bad.
   Provider      The company that files an AI product on the
                 register.
   AI product    A named, version-pinned AI system filed by a
                 provider.
   Independent Assurance Evidence
                 A benchmark or audit report from a party other than
                 the provider that the product meets the minimum
                 assurance requirements for a stated use case.  It is
                 attached at filing and assessed by each relying
                 bank, never by the register.
   Assurance level
                 One of three declared with the evidence:
                 self-declared, independently verified,
                 independently audited.  It describes the evidence
                 provided; nobody certifies it.
   Bank          The relying party that executes payment
                 instructions.  It admits products to its list and
                 verifies every instruction.
   Customer      The legal person whose funds an AI agent moves.
   AI agent      The customer's deployment of an admitted product:
                 a private key, a configuration, a mandate.
   Supervisor    A regulator that receives evidence through
                 supervisory or incident processes.  It operates no
                 part of the infrastructure.
   Passport      The envelope defined in Section 4.  A passport that
                 satisfies Sections 3 to 7 is APS 1001-conformant.

3.  Registration and Admission

   3.1  A provider MUST file an AI product on the register before
        any bank admits it.  A filing MUST name the legal entity, an
        accountable principal with a signed declaration that the
        filing is accurate, insurance in force at or above the
        minimum cover, the product and its pinned model version, the
        location of its documentation, Independent Assurance
        Evidence naming the use case it covers, and the assurance
        level declared with that evidence.  A filing MUST NOT name a
        customer or contain any mandate content.

   3.2  The register MUST run completeness checks and record each
        result next to the entry:

           F.1  provider matches the companies register
           F.2  accountable principal named, with a signed
                declaration
           F.3  insurance evidenced, cover at or above the minimum,
                in force
           F.4  product documented with a pinned model version
           F.5  Independent Assurance Evidence attached, with its
                assurance level, covering the registered use case
           F.6  product not already on the register

        F.1 SHOULD be answered from the public company register
        (Companies House in the UK), which reports what companies
        filed and verifies nothing itself.

        The register MUST sign a receipt for the filing.  The
        register MUST NOT review, approve or rank filings.

   3.3  A bank MUST decide for itself whether its customers may
        delegate payments to a registered product.  The decision is
        the bank's; it MAY use any assessment it chooses, including
        its own evaluation of the Independent Assurance Evidence
        against the question "does this product meet the minimum
        assurance requirements for this use case".  Automated
        review MAY recommend; a named officer MUST decide.

   3.4  An admission MUST state the ceilings that every mandate on
        the product at that bank must satisfy (maximum per-payment
        limit, maximum rolling limit per payee account, maximum
        payments per day, maximum validity, permitted actions,
        currency) and a hold condition (an amount above which the
        bank holds the instruction for a named person at the
        customer).  A bank MAY require a minimum assurance level and
        MAY scale its ceilings by the level declared.

   3.5  A bank SHOULD tier its ceilings by the type of account the
        AI agent operates on and by customer class, as it already
        does for other payment channels.  An AI agent is a payment
        channel on the account: every mandate MUST sit at or below
        the lower of the product ceiling for that account type and
        the admission ceiling for the product.

   3.6  An admission MAY be suspended or withdrawn by the bank.
        Either act MUST cascade to every passport issued on the
        product at that bank.

4.  The Passport

   A passport MUST consist of three signed tokens (JWT, RFC 7519;
   EdDSA, RFC 8037) and an identifier:

      admission       signed by the BANK: the admitted product
                      (registration reference, name, identifier,
                      version, hash of the register's receipt), the
                      assurance level declared, ceilings, hold
                      condition, validity, list pointer, and the hash
                      of the agent_identity it was issued for.
      agent_identity  signed by the CUSTOMER: agent name, the product
                      it runs on, agent public key (cnf, RFC 7800),
                      proof of possession, configuration hash, key
                      custody.
      mandate         signed by the CUSTOMER: permitted actions,
                      currency, payee allow-list by account with the
                      public-register record of each payee where one
                      was checked, per-payment limit, rolling limit
                      per payee account, maximum payments per day,
                      expiry, and the account type and customer
                      class the limits derive from, as an
                      authorization_details object (RFC 9396).

   No party MAY alter a claim it did not sign.  A passport carries
   permission, not personal data.

5.  Issuance

   5.1  A customer registers an AI agent inside its bank's own
        channel by choosing an admitted product, generating a key
        pair, proving possession of the private key by signing the
        bank's challenge, and signing agent_identity.  This creates
        an agent record.  It is not a passport.

   5.2  The customer writes its mandate.  Before signing, the bank
        MUST check that every limit sits within the lower of the
        product's admission ceilings and the account-type tier
        (containment).  A mandate outside them MUST NOT be signed.
        Where a payee is identified by company number, the bank
        SHOULD read the public company register and record the
        legal name, status and registered office in the mandate.
        The register holds no bank accounts; the account is the
        customer's statement, and payment goes only to that account.

   5.3  On signature of a contained mandate the bank's system MUST
        sign the admission, assign the passport identifier, set the
        list status to ACTIVE and, where a purpose-bound rail is in
        use, mirror the mandate on it.  No further human review
        takes place: the human decision was the admission.

6.  Verification Procedure

   The AI agent MUST sign every instruction with the key named in
   agent_identity.  The bank MUST evaluate the following in order
   and stop at the first failure:

      R.1  admission signature verifies (bank key)
      R.2  passport ACTIVE and unexpired (list lookup)
      R.3  agent_identity verifies (customer key) and is bound to
           this admission
      R.4  instruction signed by the agent key in agent_identity
      R.5  mandate present, customer-signed, unexpired
      R.6  action permitted; payee account on the allow-list
      R.7  amount within the per-payment limit
      R.8  amount plus the bank's own rolling total within the
           limit per payee account
      R.9  amount above the hold condition            -> ESCALATE
      else                                            -> ALLOW

   The result MUST cite the rule that decided it and MUST be
   accompanied by a receipt signed by the bank.  Limits live in the
   mandate; running totals live at the bank.

7.  Delegation

   Where an AI agent delegates to another, the delegation MUST be
   signed by the delegating key, and for scopes S0 (mandate),
   S1 ... Sn:

      Sn  is a subset of  ...  S1  is a subset of  S0,  and
      the action is an element of Sn.

   Delegation MAY narrow authority.  It MUST NOT expand it.

8.  Evidence

   8.1  Every filing, admission, signature, lifecycle change,
        verification and incident MUST be recorded in an
        append-only, hash-chained log.  Every verification MUST be
        reproducible from its recorded inputs.

   8.2  Every refusal MUST be recorded with the instruction, the
        rule, the reason, its class and, where a document produced
        the instruction, the extraction that produced it.  Two
        classes MUST be distinguished: a fraud indicator (the
        instruction points at a destination, key or record the
        customer never authorised: redirection, a copied passport, a
        replay, a forged claim) and an agent error (a wrong amount,
        currency, action or frequency inside the agent's own remit,
        an operational quality event for the agent's owner).  A
        repeated refusal of the same rule SHOULD raise an alert at
        the bank.  Nothing in this standard reports a refusal to an
        authority; evidence is available on request (8.3).

   8.4  Each party sees only what its role requires: the customer,
        and conceptually the provider, its own agent's error
        pattern; the bank its instructions, checks and verdicts; a
        supervisor evidence on request.

   8.3  For any passport the bank MUST be able to produce one
        evidence bundle: the register filing and receipt, the
        admission, the agent identity, the mandate, every
        verification with its inputs and receipt, the refusals, and
        the chain segment, verifiable with the published public
        keys.  A supervisor MAY request such a bundle through normal
        supervisory or incident processes.  The export MUST itself
        be recorded.

9.  Lifecycle

   File      A provider files an AI product (Section 3.1).
   Admit     A bank runs its own assessment and admits the product
             with ceilings and a hold condition (Sections 3.3, 3.4).
   Issue     A customer registers an AI agent and signs a contained
             mandate; the passport is issued at signing (Section 5).
   Act       The bank verifies each instruction (Section 6).
   Detect    Every refusal is recorded; patterns raise alerts.
   Revoke    The bank sets the list status of a passport or of a
             product.  The next instruction fails at R.2 on every
             rail that mirrors the mandate.
   Evidence  Any passport can be exported as one bundle
             (Section 8.3).

10. Governance

   APS 1001 is written for adoption by an industry body on the
   precedent of the Open Banking Implementation Entity: the body
   maintains the standard and the register, banks adopt it through
   commercial schemes because they carry the fraud loss and the
   customer relationship, and regulators set guardrails and receive
   evidence without building, operating or approving the
   technology.  Nothing in this standard requires or implies
   regulatory approval of any AI product.

11. Security Considerations

   A copied passport is useless without the agent's private key
   (R.4).  A forged or altered claim fails its signature (R.1, R.3,
   R.5).  A manipulated agent that requests payment to an account
   the customer never listed fails R.6 regardless of how genuine the
   invoice appeared.  A mandate cannot exceed the product's
   ceilings at that bank (Section 5.2).  Compromise of the bank's
   key, and attestation of the running software, are out of scope.

12. What APS 1001 Does Not Specify

   Settlement.  Know-your-customer, sanctions or funds checks.
   Whether a payment is wise.  Whether an AI product is good: the
   register records accountability and the bank makes its own
   assessment.  Liability of the provider for an agent's conduct
   beyond the accuracy of its filing and the insurance it declared.
   Any judgement by a model: models read and draft; rules decide;
   humans sign.

13. References

   APS 1002 (delegation chains, reserved), APS 2001 (tax rails,
   reserved), RFC 2119, RFC 7519 (JWT), RFC 7800 (cnf), RFC 8037
   (EdDSA), RFC 9396 (Rich Authorization Requests), W3C Verifiable
   Credentials (JWT profile), NIST NCCoE 2026 (agent identity and
   authorization), FATF 2025 (AI and AML/CFT), HM Treasury (2026)
   Modernising Payment Services Regulation, section 3.2 and
   question 15; the Open Banking chapter of the same consultation.

Authors' Addresses

   Legis Labs Ltd, Cambridge, United Kingdom.  Developed alongside
   Cambridge academic and industry partners.
   Reference implementation: https://cdir.legislabs.uk
   Source: https://github.com/LegisLabs/agent-passport
