Know Your Agent Working Group                                 T. Cvikl
Recommendation P.1 (09/2026)                                  A. Tran
Series P: Authority of Software Agents on Payment Rails        B. Liu
Category: Proposed Standard                               J. Burnazyan
                                                     Legis Labs Ltd
                                                     6 September 2026


                        RECOMMENDATION P.1

        Agent Passport: Authority of Autonomous Agents on Payment Rails


Status of this Memo

   This Recommendation defines the procedure by which a payment institution's
   autonomous software agent proves, before a payment executes, that
   it acts within a current, human-granted authority.  It is a
   proposal for discussion, demonstrated on synthetic data.  It does
   not describe a current legal requirement.  Distribution is
   unlimited.

Abstract

   An agent that can be identified can still act beyond what its
   principal allowed.  This document separates identity from
   authority.  An Agent Passport is an envelope of three signed
   claims, each made by the only party entitled to make it: the
   supervisory authority, the provider operating the agent, and the
   customer whose funds are at stake.  A relying bank verifies the
   envelope and the signed instruction with an ordered, deny-by-
   default procedure and answers ALLOW, ESCALATE or DENY with a rule
   citation and a signed receipt.  Authority may be delegated but
   never expanded.  Revocation is a registry lookup.  Every decision
   is replayable.

1.  Introduction

   Firms delegate invoice payment to AI agents.  A bank receiving an
   instruction cannot determine which agent sent it, whether it was
   permitted to, or who answers for it.  Since 2024, UK banks bear
   the loss when a misdirected payment is authorised.  This standard
   gives the bank one verification call that answers those three
   questions before money moves.

   The key words MUST, MUST NOT and SHOULD are to be interpreted as
   described in RFC 2119.

2.  Terminology

   Authority     The supervisor that assures the provider and its
                 agent and maintains the status registry.
   Provider      The regulated institution operating the agent.
   Customer      The legal person whose funds the agent moves.
   Agent         Software holding a private key, acting for the
                 provider on the customer's behalf.
   Relying party The bank that executes payment instructions.
   Passport      The envelope defined in Section 3.  A passport that
                 satisfies Sections 3 to 6 is APS 1001-conformant.  A passport that
                 satisfies Sections 3 to 6 is P.1-conformant.

3.  The Passport

   A passport MUST consist of three signed tokens (JWT, RFC 7519;
   EdDSA, RFC 8037) and an identifier:

      assurance       signed by the AUTHORITY: provider licence,
                      assurance status, supervisor condition,
                      validity, registry pointer, and the hash of the
                      agent_identity it was issued for.
      agent_identity  signed by the PROVIDER: agent name, agent
                      public key (cnf, RFC 7800), software and
                      configuration hash.
      mandate         signed by the CUSTOMER: permitted actions,
                      payee allow-list by account, per-payment
                      ceiling, rolling monthly ceiling, expiry, as an
                      authorization_details object (RFC 9396).

   No party MAY alter a claim it did not sign.  A passport carries
   permission, not personal data.

4.  Verification Procedure

   The agent MUST sign every instruction with the key named in
   agent_identity.  The relying party MUST evaluate the following in
   order and stop at the first failure:

      R.1  assurance signature verifies (authority key)
      R.2  assurance ACTIVE and unexpired (registry lookup)
      R.3  agent_identity verifies and is bound to this assurance
      R.4  instruction signed by the agent key in agent_identity
      R.5  mandate present, customer-signed, unexpired
      R.6  action permitted; payee account on the allow-list
      R.7  amount within the per-payment ceiling
      R.8  amount plus the relying party's own rolling total within
           the monthly ceiling
      R.9  amount above the supervisor condition  -> ESCALATE
      else                                        -> ALLOW

   The result MUST cite the rule that decided it and MUST be
   accompanied by a receipt signed by the authority.  Ceilings live
   in the mandate; running totals live at the relying party.

5.  Delegation

   Where an agent delegates to another, the delegation MUST be signed
   by the delegating key, and for scopes S0 (mandate), S1 ... Sn:

      Sn  is a subset of  ...  S1  is a subset of  S0,  and
      the action is an element of Sn.

   Delegation MAY narrow authority.  It MUST NOT expand it.

6.  Lifecycle

   Issue     Evidence is read into cited facts; written rules are
             applied; adversarial cases are run through the
             procedure of Section 4; a human officer decides and the
             authority signs.  No machine MAY issue.
   Act       The relying party verifies each instruction.
   Detect    Every refusal is recorded.  A repeated refusal of the
             same rule SHOULD raise an alert to the authority.
   Revoke    The authority sets the registry status.  The next
             instruction fails at R.2 on every rail that mirrors
             the mandate.
   Replay    Every decision MUST be reproducible from its recorded
             inputs.

7.  Security Considerations

   A copied passport is useless without the agent's private key
   (R.4).  A forged or altered claim fails its signature (R.1, R.3,
   R.5).  A manipulated agent that requests payment to an account
   the customer never listed fails R.6 regardless of how genuine the
   invoice appeared.  Compromise of the authority's key, and
   attestation of the running software, are out of scope.

8.  What This Recommendation Does Not Specify

   Settlement.  Know-your-customer, sanctions or funds checks.
   Whether a payment is wise.  Any judgement by a model: models read
   and draft; rules decide; humans sign.

9.  References

   APS 1002 (delegation chains, reserved), APS 2001 (tax rails,
   reserved), RFC 2119, RFC 7519 (JWT), RFC 7800 (cnf), RFC 8037 (EdDSA),
   RFC 9396 (Rich Authorization Requests), W3C Verifiable
   Credentials (JWT profile), NIST NCCoE 2026 (agent identity and
   authorization), FATF 2025 (AI and AML/CFT).

Authors' Addresses

   Legis Labs Ltd, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
   Reference implementation: https://pay.cdir.legislabs.uk
   Source: https://github.com/LegisLabs/agent-passport
